Cleanup and fixes for structuring (#162)
json-schema-org/understanding-json-schema: source/structuring.rst

   single: structuring; schema identification

.. _schema-identification:

Schema Identification
---------------------

Like any other code, schemas are easier to maintain if they can be
broken down into logical units that reference each other as necessary.
In order to reference a schema, we need a way to identify a schema.
Schema documents are identified by URIs. Schemas documents are not
required to have an identifier, but obviously you will need one if you
want to reference the schema from another. In the following sections
we will see how the "identifier" for a schema is determined.

.. index::
   single: retrieval URI
   single: structuring; schema identification; retrieval URI

.. _schema-identification:

Retrieval URI
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Even though schemas are identified by URIs, those identifiers are not
necessarily network accessible. They are just identifiers.
Implementations generally provide a way for you to load schemas into
an internal schema database and they retrieve schemas from there when
they are referenced.

How ever the schema is retrieved, the URI used to fetch the schema is
known as the "retrieval URI" and is always an absolute URI. It's often

> possible to pass a literal schema to an implementation in which case

Reviewer: I like the rewrite very much. It's very comprehensible for me. There's just the term *literal schema* which isn't as obvious to me. I'm not a native speaker so can't tell how common *literal* is being used. So far I guess in this context it means to pass an already loaded in-memory object or a serialized form of a schema to a schema processor which hasn't been resolved by the schema processor itself.

I do not propose using a different term. But it's used at least once more in this section and maybe it could be defined or explained in an additional sentence in some way, particularly if it is some kind of JSON-Schema terminology.

If you don't mind I'll do a little review....

Author: Thank you! This is really helpful feedback.

The word "literal" is a term used in programming languages (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Literal_(computer_programming)). However, I used it wrong. That line should say "schema literal", not "literal schema". You might be familiar with the term "string literal", meaning an expression that represents a string as opposed to a variable that points to a string. I was attempting to convey the same kind of idea, an expression representing a schema, but with no variable giving it a "name" you can refer to it by. It can only be used in the expression it is part of because there is way to refer to it beyond that expression.

I think if I had used the term correctly it would have been more clear but, It's still probably too much jargon for this guide. We want this to be as accessible as possible. I'll see what I can do to make it more clear.

Author: I decided to change the terminology from "schema literal" to "anonymous schema" and I added a sentence defining what that means. Hopefully, that makes things a little more clear.

Reviewer: Thank you for your openess. You're right. I know string literal or the "object literal notation" (`{ prop: "value" }`) in JavaScript but *anonymous schema* sounds much better to me. Without any context I could immediately guess that it is probably a schema without an `$id` identifier.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Just like on the web, it's possible to retrieve the same schema from
multiple URIs. Therefore, it's a good idea for each schema to define
its canonical URI using the ``$id`` keyword.

When the ``$id`` keyword appears at the root of the schema, it defines
the canonical URI for the schema. This URI must resolve against the
`retrieval-uri` and result in an absolute URI.

Let's assume I ask the implementation for a schema using the URI
``https://example.com/schemas/billing-address`` and I get the following
schema.

.. schema_example::

    {
      "$id": "/schemas/address",

      "type": "object",
      "properties": {
        "street_address": { "type": "string" },
        "city": { "type": "string" },
        "state": { "type": "string" }
      },
      "required": ["street_address", "city", "state"]
    }

The identifier for this schema is
``https://example.com/schemas/address``, which is the result of the
``$id`` URI resolving against the `retrieval-uri`.

However, using a relative URI when setting a canonical URI can be
problematic. For example, we couldn't use this schema as a schema
literal because there would be no `retrieval-uri` to resolve against

> and this schema would not have absolute URI to use as an identifier.

Reviewer: ... an absolute URI ...

be treated as JSON Schema keywords and be ignored by the validator.

For this example, let's say we want to define a customer record, where
each customer may have both a shipping and a billing address.
Addresses are always the same---they have a street address, city and
state---so we don't want to duplicate that part of the schema
everywhere we want to store an address.  Not only would that make the
schema more verbose, but it makes updating it in the future more
difficult.  If our imaginary company were to start doing international
business in the future and we wanted to add a country field to all the
addresses, it would be better to do this in a single place rather than
everywhere that addresses are used.

.. schema_example::

    {
      "$id": "https://example.com/schemas/customer",

      "type": "object",
      "properties": {
        "first_name": { "type": "string" },
        "last_name": { "type": "string" },
        "shipping_address": { "$ref": "/schemas/address" },
        "billing_address": { "$ref": "/schemas/address" }
      },
      "required": ["first_name", "last_name", "shipping_address", "billing_address"]
    }

> The relative URIs in ``$ref`` resolves against the schema's identifier

Reviewer: 1) The relative URIs [...] *resolve_* against...
2) The example before uses `/schemas/address`. Wouldn't that be *absolute paths* (rooted in the URI domain) whereas *relative paths* would always begin with a `./` or `../`?

Author: I'm using the definitions in [RFC3986 Section 4.1](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3986#section-4.1), 4.2, and 4.3. The thing that makes these URIs relative is the lack of a scheme and domain. At least a link to the RFC is probably warranted if not a short section near the top defining terminology.

Reviewer: Always good to have RFCs to talk about. :+1 Indeed I thought about an URIs `path` segment, only, without noticing, though, that leading 'dots' don't matter to the definition of *relative URI-reference*. But using the term *relative URI-Reference* from the RFC here, would probably not have helped me, either, so I don't ask for changing the wording here. :smiley:  A quote may still make sense. 

Just a minor side node (warning I may be a bit nitpick, here): as far as I understood section 4 *lack of a scheme* is sufficient to make an URI a relative URI-reference. Since the ABNF for an URI-Reference contains *authority* it appears as if it could still contain a *domain* (given you used *domain* interchangibly for *authority*) . See [Appendix B](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3986#appendix-B) and `$4`.

(``https://example.com/schemas/customer``) which results in
``https://example.com/schemas/address``. The implementation retrieves
that schema and evaluates the "shipping_address" and "billing_address"
properties using that schema.

.. index::
   single: definitions
   single: structuring; definitions

.. _definitions:

definitions
-----------

Sometimes we have small subschemas that are only intended for use in
the current schema and it doesn't make sense to define them as
separate schemas. Although we can identify any subschema using JSON

> Pointers or anchors, the ``definitions`` keyword gives us a

Reviewer: Was using  `definitions` rather than `$defs` intentional, here?

Author: I meant `definitions`. So far, this site only covers draft-07. Introducing bits of draft 2019-09/2020-12 would be confusing at this point. Once all of these cleanup/fixes are completed, my next step is to update for draft 2019-09, then draft 2020-12. At that point I'll rename `definitions` to `$defs`.

              ]
            },
            {
              "name": "Harry"
            }
          ]
        }
      ]
    }

Above, we created a schema that refers to itself, effectively creating
a "loop" in the validator, which is both allowed and useful. Note,
however, that a ``$ref`` referring to another ``$ref`` could cause
an infinite loop in the resolver, and is explicitly disallowed.

.. schema_example::

    {
      "definitions": {
        "alice": { "$ref": "#/definitions/bob" },
        "bob": { "$ref": "#/definitions/alice" }
      }
    }

.. index::
   single: bundling
   single: $id
   single: structuring; bundling; $id

.. _bundling:

Bundling
--------

Working with multiple schema documents is convenient for development,
but it is often more convenient for distribution to bundle all of your
schemas into a single schema document. This can be done using the
``$id`` keyword.

When ``$id`` is used in a subschema, it creates a new identifier that
any references in that subschema and any below it will resolve against
instead of the schema document's identifier. The new identifier is the
value of ``$id`` resolved against the identifier of the schema ``$id``

> appears in.

Reviewer: ... _it_ appears in

> This example, shows the customer schema example and the address schema

Reviewer: comma needed here?

Schema documents are identified by non-relative URIs.

.. note::
   URI terminology can sometimes be unintuitive. In this document, the
   following definitions are used.

   - **URI** `[1]
     <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3986#section-3>`__ or
     **non-relative URI**: A
     full URI containing a scheme (``https``) and a domain. It may
     contain a URI fragment (``#foo``). Sometimes this document will
     use "non-relative URI" to make it extra clear relative URIs are
     not allowed.
   - **relative reference** `[2]
     <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3986#section-4.2>`__: A
     partial URI that does not contain a scheme (``https``) and/or a
     domain. It may contain a fragment (``#foo``).
   - **URI-reference** `[3]
     <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3986#section-4.1>`__: A
     relative reference or non-relative URI. It may contain a URI
     fragment (``#foo``).
   - **absolute URI** `[4]
     <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3986#section-4.3>`__ A
     full URI containing a scheme (``https``) and a domain but not a
     URI fragment (``#foo``)

Schemas documents are not required to have an identifier, but

> obviously you will need one if you want to reference the schema from

Author: I can agree that "obviously" is not necessary, but I wasn't talking about any concept specific to JSON Schema. I was referring to the very obvious concept that you can't reference something that has no identifier. I can't send you mail if you don't have an address. I can't call you if you don't have phone number. It's so obvious, that it usually goes without saying.

another. In this document, we will refer to schemas with no
identifier as "anonymous schemas".

In the following sections we will see how the "identifier" for a schema is
determined.

.. index::
   single: retrieval URI
   single: structuring; schema identification; retrieval URI

.. _retrieval-uri:

Retrieval URI
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Even though schemas are identified by URIs, those identifiers are not
necessarily network accessible. They are just identifiers.
Implementations generally provide a way for you to load schemas into
an internal schema database and they retrieve schemas from there when

> they are referenced.

Author: I think the point is to get rid of the "they" and I'm on board with that. However, I don't think this suggestion quite makes sense. I'll see if I can figure out a better way to express this whole paragraph.

> How ever the schema is retrieved, the non-relative URI used to fetch

Author: I thought this might be confusing. I wasn't intending to use the conjunctive adverb "however". I meant it like "no matter how", which I believe is not spelled the same as the conjunctive adverb. I think this wording would be fine if it was spoken, but when reading it, it's distracting because it looks like it's misspelled. Maybe this will be better,

```suggestion
No matter how the schema is retrieved, the non-relative URI used to fetch
```

the schema is known as the "retrieval URI". It's often possible to
pass an anonymous schema to an implementation in which case that
schema would have no retrieval URI.

Let's assume I reference a schema using the URI
``https://example.com/schemas/address`` and I get the following
schema.

.. schema_example::

    {
      "type": "object",
      "properties": {
        "street_address": { "type": "string" },
        "city": { "type": "string" },
        "state": { "type": "string" }
      },
      "required": ["street_address", "city", "state"]
    }

The identifier for this schema is the same as the retrieval URI,

> ``https://example.com/schemas/address``.

Author: This is definitely worth referencing somewhere. I'll see what I can do.

.. index::
   single: $id
   single: canonical URI
   single: structuring; schema identification; $id

.. _canonical-uri:

Canonical URI
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Just like on the web, it's possible to retrieve the same schema from
multiple URIs. Therefore, it's a good idea for each schema to define
the preferred URI to use when referencing the schema. This preferred
URI is called the "canonical URI" and can be set using the ``$id``
keyword.

.. draft_specific::

    --Draft 4
    In Draft 4, ``$id`` is just ``id`` (without the dollar sign).

The value of ``$id`` is a URI-reference that resolves against the
`retrieval-uri`. The resulting URI is the canonical URI for the
schema.

Let's assume the URI ``https://example.com/schema/address`` and
``https://example.com/schema/billing-address`` both identify the
following schema.

.. schema_example::

    {
      "$id": "/schemas/address",

      "type": "object",
      "properties": {
        "street_address": { "type": "string" },
        "city": { "type": "string" },
        "state": { "type": "string" }
      },
      "required": ["street_address", "city", "state"]
    }

> No matter which URI is used to retrieve this schema, the canonical URI

Author: Yes, I didn't realize that was ambiguous. In this scenario, only the to URIs resented identify the schema.

will be ``https://example.com/schemas/address``, which is the result
of the ``$id`` URI-reference resolving against the `retrieval-uri`.
Implementations will use this canonical URI instead of the
`retrieval-uri` whenever a URI-reference needs to be resolved.

However, using a relative reference when setting a canonical URI can

> be problematic. For example, we couldn't use this schema as a schema
> literal because there would be no `retrieval-uri` and you can't

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
be problematic. For example, we couldn't use this schema as a 
anonymous schema because there would be no `retrieval-uri` and you can't
```

After reading your other review comments, I think you just missed this rename.

Author: Yes, missed that one.
```suggestion
be problematic. For example, we couldn't use this schema as an
anonymous schema because there would be no `retrieval-uri` and you can't
```

resolve a relative reference against nothing. For this and other
reasons, it's recommended that you always use an absolute URI when
declaring a canonical URI.

The identifier of the following schema will always be
``https://example.com/schemas/address`` no matter what the
`retrieval-uri` was or if it's used as an anonymous schema.

.. schema_example::

    {
      "$id": "https://example.com/schemas/address",

      "type": "object",
      "properties": {
        "street_address": { "type": "string" },
        "city": { "type": "string" },
        "state": { "type": "string" }
      },
      "required": ["street_address", "city", "state"]
    }

.. note::
   The behavior when setting a canonical URI that contains a URI
   fragment is undefined and should not be used because

>    implementations may treat them differently.

Author: Remember that at this point UJS is still documenting draft-07 where fragments were not forbidden yet. This will be updated later with the Draft 2019-09 changes this will be moved to a "draft_specific" box.

>    implementations may treat them differently.

Reviewer 2: Yes. Sorry. Totally right.

.. _json-pointer:

JSON Pointer
~~~~~~~~~~~~

In addition to identifying a schema document, you can also identify
subschemas. The most common way to do that is to use a `JSON Pointer
<https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6901>`__ in the URI fragment that
points to the subschema.

A JSON Pointer describes a slash-separated path to traverse the keys
in the objects in the document. Therefore,
``/properties/street_address`` means:

1) find the value of the key ``properties``
2) within that object, find the value of the key ``street_address``

The URI
``https://example.com/schemas/address#/properties/street_address``
identifies the highlighted subschema in the following schema.

.. schema_example::

    {
      "$id": "https://example.com/schemas/address",

      "type": "object",
      "properties": {
        "street_address":
      *    { "type": "string" },
        "city": { "type": "string" },
        "state": { "type": "string" }
      },
      "required": ["street_address", "city", "state"]
    }

.. index::
   single: $id
   single: named anchors
   single: structuring; subschema identification; $id

.. _anchor:

Named Anchors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Another way to identify a subschema is to create a named anchor in

Author: I agree, but we should also make it clear that this isn't the only way to identify a sub-schema. I'm going to rework this.

the schema using the ``$id`` keyword and using that name in the URI
fragment instead of a JSON Pointer.

.. draft_specific::

    --Draft 4
    In Draft 4, ``$id`` is just ``id`` (without the dollar sign).

When the ``$id`` keyword contains a URI fragment, the fragment defines
a named anchor using the value of the fragment. Named anchors must
start with a letter followed by any number of letters, digits, ``-``,
``_``, ``:``, or ``.``.

.. note::
   If a named anchor is defined that doesn't follow these naming
   rules, then behavior is undefined. Your anchors might work in some

>    implementation, but not others.

Author: This is precisely what draft-07 says about this case. I don't recall what later drafts say exactly, but if they call it an error rather than undefined, this will be updated when I get to documenting those drafts.

> The effect of using a fragment in "$id" that isn't blank or doesn't follow the plain name syntax is undefined.

>    implementation, but not others.

Reviewer 2: Well huh. OK then.

The URI ``https://example.com/schemas/address#street_address``
identifies the subschema on the highlighted part of the following
schema.

.. schema_example::

    {
      "$id": "https://example.com/schemas/address",

      "type": "object",
      "properties": {
        "street_address":
    *      {
    *        "$id": "#street_address",
    *        "type": "string"
    *      },
        "city": { "type": "string" },
        "state": { "type": "string" }
      },
      "required": ["street_address", "city", "state"]
    }

.. note::
   JSON Schema doesn't define how ``$id`` should be interpreted when
   it contains both fragment and non-fragment URI parts. Therefore,
   when setting a named anchor, you should not use non-fragment URI
   parts in the URI-reference.

.. index::
   single: $ref
   single: structuring; $ref

.. _ref:

$ref
----

We can now use our knowledge of how schemas are identified, to
reference them in our schemas using the ``$ref`` keyword. The value
of ``$ref`` is a URI-reference that is resolved against the schema's

> identifier. When evaluating a schema, an implementation uses that

Author: You're right, I realize I'm using term identifier for two different things. Base URI is the correct term here. I might need to make changes in a few places to make this better.

> identifier. When evaluating a schema, an implementation uses that
> identifier to retrieve the referenced schema and evaluation is
> continued from that there.

Author: ```suggestion
identifier. When evaluating a schema, an implementation uses the
resolved identifier to retrieve the referenced schema and evaluation is
continued from the referenced schema.
```

each customer may have both a shipping and a billing address.
Addresses are always the same---they have a street address, city and
state---so we don't want to duplicate that part of the schema
everywhere we want to store an address.  Not only would that make the
schema more verbose, but it makes updating it in the future more
difficult.  If our imaginary company were to start doing international
business in the future and we wanted to add a country field to all the
addresses, it would be better to do this in a single place rather than
everywhere that addresses are used.

.. schema_example::

    {
      "$id": "https://example.com/schemas/customer",

      "type": "object",
      "properties": {
        "first_name": { "type": "string" },
        "last_name": { "type": "string" },
        "shipping_address": { "$ref": "/schemas/address" },
        "billing_address": { "$ref": "/schemas/address" }
      },
      "required": ["first_name", "last_name", "shipping_address", "billing_address"]
    }

The URI-references in ``$ref`` resolve against the schema's identifier
(``https://example.com/schemas/customer``) which results in

> ``https://example.com/schemas/address``. The implementation retrieves
> that schema and uses it to evaluate the "shipping_address" and
> "billing_address" properties.

Author: I don't like "reference resolver". It sounds like an implementation detail. I think the question of where an implementation gets schemas from has already been covered and we don't need to do it again. If you really think it's necessary, perhaps the following is good enough?

```suggestion
``https://example.com/schemas/address``. The implementation retrieves
that schema (usually from its internal schema database) and uses it to 
evaluate the "shipping_address" and "billing_address" properties.
```

schema for this and it will only be used in this schema, so it's a
good candidate for using ``definitions``.

.. schema_example::

    {
      "$id": "https://example.com/schemas/customer",

      "type": "object",
      "properties": {
        "first_name": { "$ref": "#/definitions/name" },
        "last_name": { "$ref": "#/definitions/name" },
        "shipping_address": { "$ref": "/schemas/address" },
        "billing_address": { "$ref": "/schemas/address" }
      },
      "required": ["first_name", "last_name", "shipping_address", "billing_address"],

      "definitions": {
        "name": { "type": "string" }
      }
    }

``$ref`` isn't just good for avoiding duplication. It can also be
useful for writing schemas that are easier to read and maintain.
Complex parts of the schema can be defined in ``definitions`` with
descriptive names and referenced where it's needed. This allows
readers of the schema to more quickly and easily understand the schema
at a high level before diving into the more complex parts.

.. note::
   It's possible to reference an external subschema, but generally you
   want to limit your references to either external schemas, or

>    internal subschemas defined in ``definitions``.

Author: The Law of Demeter.

> .. note::
>    It's possible to reference an external subschema, but generally you
>    want to limit your references to either external schemas, or
>    internal subschemas defined in ``definitions``.

Reviewer 2: I missread this. I think the last comma needs to be removed here, and "or" replaced with "and/or"

I read "you want to only reference external schemas OR internal subschemas defined in `definitions".

```suggestion
.. note::
   It's possible to reference an external subschema, but generally you
   want to limit your references to either external schemas and/or`
   internal subschemas defined in ``definitions``.
```

        }
      }
    }
    --
    // A snippet of the British royal family tree
    {
      "name": "Elizabeth",
      "children": [
        {
          "name": "Charles",
          "children": [
            {
              "name": "William",
              "children": [
                { "name": "George" },
                { "name": "Charlotte" }
              ]
            },
            {
              "name": "Harry"
            }
          ]
        }
      ]
    }

Above, we created a schema that refers to itself, effectively creating
a "loop" in the validator, which is both allowed and useful. Note,
however, that a ``$ref`` referring to another ``$ref`` could cause
an infinite loop in the resolver, and is explicitly disallowed.

.. schema_example::

    {
      "definitions": {
        "alice": { "$ref": "#/definitions/bob" },
        "bob": { "$ref": "#/definitions/alice" }
      }
    }

.. index::
   single: bundling
   single: $id
   single: structuring; bundling; $id

.. _bundling:

Bundling
--------

Working with multiple schema documents is convenient for development,
but it is often more convenient for distribution to bundle all of your

> schemas into a single schema document. This can be done using the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
schemas into a single schema document (Compound Schema Document). This can be done using the
```

Author: Remember this is for draft-07. The concept of a "Compound Schema" didn't exist yet. In draft 2019-09, `$id` indicates an embedded schema, but before that, `$id` only changes the base URI. It's still considered a single schema document.

``$id`` keyword.

.. draft_specific::

    --Draft 4
    In Draft 4, ``$id`` is just ``id`` (without the dollar sign).

> When ``$id`` is used in a subschema, it creates a new identifier that
> any references in that subschema and any below it will resolve against

Reviewer 2: Base URI.
```suggestion
When ``$id`` is used in a subschema, it creates a new Base URI that
any references in that subschema and any descendant subschemas will resolve against
```

instead of the schema document's identifier. The new identifier is the
value of ``$id`` resolved against the identifier of the schema it

> appears in.

Reviewer 2: Generally, but not always. It's resolved against the Base URI.

Author: I'm using "identifier" to mean Base URI again. I'll fix t.

This example shows the customer schema example and the address schema

> example bundled into a single schema document.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
example bundled into a Compound Schema Document.
```

Author: You can't technically make a Compound Schema in draft-07.

        "billing_address": { "$ref": "/schemas/address" }
      },
      "required": ["first_name", "last_name", "shipping_address", "billing_address"],

      "definitions": {
        "address": {
          "$id": "/schemas/address",

          "type": "object",
          "properties": {
            "street_address": { "type": "string" },
            "city": { "type": "string" },
            "state": { "$ref": "#/definitions/state" }
          },
          "required": ["street_address", "city", "state"],

          "definitions": {
            "state": { "enum": ["CA", "NY", "... etc ..."] }
          }
        }
      }
    }

Notice that the ``$ref`` keywords from the customer schema resolve the
same way they did before except that the address schema is now defined
at ``/definitions/address`` instead of a separate schema document. You
should also see that the ``"$ref": "#/definitions/state"`` resolves to
the ``definitions`` keyword in the address schema rather than the one
at the top level schema like it would if the subschema ``$id`` wasn't
used.

You might notice that this creates a situation where there are
multiple ways to identify a schema. Instead of referencing

> ``/schemas/address`` (``https://example.com/schemas/address``) I could

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``/schemas/address`` (``https://example.com/schemas/address``) You could
```

have used ``#/definitions/address``
(``https://example.com/schemas/customer#/definitions/address``). While
both of these will work, the one shown in the example is preferred
because the  ``$id`` keyword establishes
``https://example.com/schemas/address`` as the canonical URI for the

> schema being referenced.

Reviewer 2: Only the canonical URI is guaranteed to work.

Implementations MAY provide support for non-canonical URI references, but it is not required.

Author: Remember this is for draft-07. Allowing implementations to not support non-canonical URIs was added in 2019-09.

Reviewer 2: We didn't define what a canonical URI meant for JSON Schema in draft-07.
But I understand "canonical URI" still has a meaning.

.. note::

>    There doesn't seem to be any good reason to use ``$id`` in a
>    subschema when developing schemas. It's generally best not to use
>    this feature explicitly and use schema bundling tools to construct
>    bundled schemas if you need such a thing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   It is unusual to use ``$id`` in a subschema when developing schemas.
   It's generally best not to use this feature explicitly and use schema 
   bundling tools to construct Compound Schema Documents if you need such a thing.
```
